
1. Science. 2020 Jul 24;369(6502). pii: eaav3751. doi: 10.1126/science.aav3751.

Simultaneous cross-evaluation of heterogeneous E. coli datasets via mechanistic
simulation.

Macklin DN(#)(1)(2), Ahn-Horst TA(#)(1)(2), Choi H(#)(1)(2), Ruggero NA(#)(2)(3),
Carrera J(#)(1)(2), Mason JC(#)(1)(2), Sun G(1)(2), Agmon E(1)(2), DeFelice
MM(1)(2), Maayan I(1)(2), Lane K(1)(2), Spangler RK(1)(2), Gillies TE(1)(2),
Paull ML(1), Akhter S(1), Bray SR(1), Weaver DS(4), Keseler IM(4), Karp PD(4),
Morrison JH(2), Covert MW(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Allen Discovery Center at Stanford University, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA.
(4)SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
mcovert@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2020 Oct;17(10):958.

The extensive heterogeneity of biological data poses challenges to analysis and
interpretation. Construction of a large-scale mechanistic model of Escherichia
coli enabled us to integrate and cross-evaluate a massive, heterogeneous dataset 
based on measurements reported by various groups over decades. We identified
inconsistencies with functional consequences across the data, including that the 
total output of the ribosomes and RNA polymerases described by data are not
sufficient for a cell to reproduce measured doubling times, that measured
metabolic parameters are neither fully compatible with each other nor with
overall growth, and that essential proteins are absent during the cell cycle-and 
the cell is robust to this absence. Finally, considering these data as a whole
leads to successful predictions of new experimental outcomes, in this case
protein half-lives.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aav3751 
PMCID: PMC7990026
PMID: 32703847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

