
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids. 2017 Nov;1862(11):1287-1299. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.10.007. Epub 2016 Oct 17.

Bacterial lipid diversity.

López-Lara IM(1), Geiger O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad s/n, Apdo, Postal 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos CP62210, Mexico.
(2)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad s/n, Apdo, Postal 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos CP62210, Mexico.
Electronic address: otto@ccg.unam.mx.

The glycerophospholipids phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylglycerol (PG), and
cardiolipin (CL) are major structural components of bacterial membranes. In some 
bacteria, phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidylinositol and its derivatives form
part of the membrane. PG or CL can be modified with the amino acid residues
lysine, alanine, or arginine. Diacylglycerol is the lipid anchor from which
syntheses of phosphorus-free glycerolipids, such as glycolipids, sulfolipids, or 
homoserine-derived lipids initiate. Many membrane lipids are subject to turnover 
and some of them are recycled. Other lipids associated with the membrane include 
isoprenoids and their derivatives such as hopanoids. Ornithine-containing lipids 
are widespread in Bacteria but absent in Archaea and Eukarya. Some lipids are
probably associated exclusively with the outer membrane of many bacteria, i.e.
lipopolysaccharides, sphingolipids, or sulfonolipids. For certain specialized
membrane functions, specific lipid structures might be required. Upon cyst
formation in Azotobacter vinelandii, phenolic lipids are accumulated in the
membrane. Anammox bacteria contain ladderane lipids in the membrane surrounding
the anammoxosome organelle, presumably to impede the passage of highly toxic
compounds generated during the anammox reaction. Considering that present
knowledge on bacterial lipids was obtained from only a few bacterial species, we 
are probably only starting to unravel the full scale of lipid diversity in
bacteria. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Bacterial Lipids
edited by Russell E. Bishop.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.10.007 
PMID: 27760387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 12;290(24):15102-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.639575. Epub
2015 Apr 29.

OlsG (Sinac_1600) Is an Ornithine Lipid N-Methyltransferase from the
Planctomycete Singulisphaera acidiphila.

Escobedo-Hinojosa WI(1), Vences-Guzmán MÁ(1), Schubotz F(2), Sandoval-Calderón
M(1), Summons RE(2), López-Lara IM(1), Geiger O(1), Sohlenkamp C(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Cuernavaca, Morelos CP62210, Mexico and.
(2)the Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02144.
(3)From the Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Cuernavaca, Morelos CP62210, Mexico and chsohlen@ccg.unam.mx.

Ornithine lipids (OLs) are phosphorus-free membrane lipids widespread in bacteria
but absent from archaea and eukaryotes. In addition to the unmodified OLs, a
variety of OL derivatives hydroxylated in different structural positions has been
reported. Recently, methylated derivatives of OLs were described in several
planctomycetes isolated from a peat bog in Northern Russia, although the
gene/enzyme responsible for the N-methylation of OL remained obscure. Here we
identify and characterize the OL N-methyltransferase OlsG (Sinac_1600) from the
planctomycete Singulisphaera acidiphila. When OlsG is co-expressed with the OL
synthase OlsF in Escherichia coli, methylated OL derivatives are formed. An in
vitro characterization shows that OlsG is responsible for the 3-fold methylation 
of the terminal δ-nitrogen of OL. Methylation is dependent on the presence of the
detergent Triton X-100 and the methyldonor S-adenosylmethionine.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.639575 
PMCID: PMC4463453
PMID: 25925947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Environ Microbiol. 2015 May;17(5):1487-96. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12562. Epub
2014 Aug 7.

Discovery of a bifunctional acyltransferase responsible for ornithine lipid
synthesis in Serratia proteamaculans.

Vences-Guzmán MÁ(1), Guan Z, Escobedo-Hinojosa WI, Bermúdez-Barrientos JR, Geiger
O, Sohlenkamp C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad s/n, Apdo. Postal 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos, CP62210, Mexico;
Programa de Doctorado en Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Av. Universidad s/n, Apdo. Postal 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos, CP62210,
Mexico.

Ornithine lipids (OLs) are phosphorus-free membrane lipids that can be formed by 
many bacteria but that are absent from archaea and eukaryotes. A function for OLs
in stress conditions and in host-bacteria interactions has been shown in some
bacteria. Some bacterial species have been described that can form OLs, but lack 
the known genes (olsBA) involved in its biosynthesis, which implied the existence
of a second pathway. Here we describe the bifunctional protein OlsF from Serratia
proteamaculans involved in OL formation. Expression of OlsF and its homologue
from Flavobacterium johnsoniae in Escherichia coli causes OL formation. Deletion 
of OlsF in S. proteamaculans caused the absence of OL formation. Homologues of
OlsF are widely distributed among γ-, δ- and ε-Proteobacteria and in the
Cytophaga-Flavobacterium-Bacteroidetes group of bacteria, including several
well-studied pathogens for which the presence of OLs has not been suspected, such
as for example Vibrio cholerae and Klebsiella pneumonia. Using genomic data, we
predict that about 50% of bacterial species can form OLs.

© 2014 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12562 
PMID: 25040623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 May;1801(5):593-604. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2010.02.001. Epub 2010 Feb 11.

Altered lipid A structures and polymyxin hypersensitivity of Rhizobium etli
mutants lacking the LpxE and LpxF phosphatases.

Ingram BO(1), Sohlenkamp C, Geiger O, Raetz CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

The lipid A of Rhizobium etli, a nitrogen-fixing plant endosymbiont, displays
significant structural differences when compared to that of Escherichia coli. An 
especially striking feature of R. etli lipid A is that it lacks both the 1- and
4'-phosphate groups. The 4'-phosphate moiety of the distal glucosamine unit is
replaced with a galacturonic acid residue. The dephosphorylated proximal unit is 
present as a mixture of the glucosamine hemiacetal and an oxidized
2-aminogluconate derivative. Distinct lipid A phosphatases directed to the 1 or
the 4'-positions have been identified previously in extracts of R. etli and
Rhizobium leguminosarum. The corresponding structural genes, lpxE and lpxF,
respectively, have also been identified. Here, we describe the isolation and
characterization of R. etli deletion mutants in each of these phosphatase genes
and the construction of a double phosphatase mutant. Mass spectrometry confirmed 
that the mutant strains completely lacked the wild-type lipid A species and
accumulated the expected phosphate-containing derivatives. Moreover,
radiochemical analysis revealed that phosphatase activity was absent in membranes
prepared from the mutants. Our results indicate that LpxE and LpxF are solely
responsible for selectively dephosphorylating the lipid A molecules of R. etli.
All the mutant strains showed an increased sensitivity to polymyxin relative to
the wild-type. However, despite the presence of altered lipid A species
containing one or both phosphate groups, all the phosphatase mutants formed
nitrogen-fixing nodules on Phaseolus vulgaris. Therefore, the dephosphorylation
of lipid A molecules in R. etli is not required for nodulation but may instead
play a role in protecting the bacteria from cationic antimicrobial peptides or
other immune responses of plants.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2010.02.001 
PMCID: PMC2839054
PMID: 20153447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 5;107(1):302-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912930107. 
Epub 2009 Dec 14.

Sinorhizobium meliloti phospholipase C required for lipid remodeling during
phosphorus limitation.

Zavaleta-Pastor M(1), Sohlenkamp C, Gao JL, Guan Z, Zaheer R, Finan TM, Raetz CR,
López-Lara IM, Geiger O.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Cuernavaca, Morelos 62251, Mexico.

Rhizobia are Gram-negative soil bacteria able to establish nitrogen-fixing root
nodules with their respective legume host plants. Besides phosphatidylglycerol,
cardiolipin, and phosphatidylethanolamine, rhizobial membranes contain
phosphatidylcholine (PC) as a major membrane lipid. Under phosphate-limiting
conditions of growth, some bacteria replace their membrane phospholipids with
lipids lacking phosphorus. In Sinorhizobium meliloti, these phosphorus-free
lipids are sulfoquinovosyl diacylglycerol, ornithine-containing lipid, and
diacylglyceryl trimethylhomoserine (DGTS). Pulse-chase experiments suggest that
the zwitterionic phospholipids phosphatidylethanolamine and PC act as
biosynthetic precursors of DGTS under phosphorus-limiting conditions. A S.
meliloti mutant, deficient in the predicted phosphatase SMc00171 was unable to
degrade PC or to form DGTS in a similar way as the wild type. Cell-free extracts 
of Escherichia coli, in which SMc00171 had been expressed, convert PC to
phosphocholine and diacylglycerol, showing that SMc00171 functions as a
phospholipase C. Diacylglycerol , in turn, is the lipid anchor from which
biosynthesis is initiated during the formation of the phosphorus-free membrane
lipid DGTS. Inorganic phosphate can be liberated from phosphocholine. These data 
suggest that, in S. meliloti under phosphate-limiting conditions, membrane
phospholipids provide a pool for metabolizable inorganic phosphate, which can be 
used for the synthesis of other essential phosphorus-containing biomolecules.
This is an example of an intracellular phospholipase C in a bacterial system;
however, the ability to degrade endogenous preexisting membrane phospholipids as 
a source of phosphorus may be a general property of Gram-negative soil bacteria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0912930107 
PMCID: PMC2806695
PMID: 20018679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2007 Nov;20(11):1421-30.

The lipid lysyl-phosphatidylglycerol is present in membranes of Rhizobium tropici
CIAT899 and confers increased resistance to polymyxin B under acidic growth
conditions.

Sohlenkamp C(1), Galindo-Lagunas KA, Guan Z, Vinuesa P, Robinson S, Thomas-Oates 
J, Raetz CR, Geiger O.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av.
Universidad s/n, Apdo. Postal 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos, CP62210, Mexico.
chsohlen@ccg.unam.mx

Lysyl-phosphatidylglycerol (LPG) is a well-known membrane lipid in several
gram-positive bacteria but is almost unheard of in gram-negative bacteria. In
Staphylococcus aureus, the gene product of mprF is responsible for LPG formation.
Low pH-inducible genes, termed IpiA, have been identified in the gram-negative
alpha-proteobacteria Rhizobium tropici and Sinorhizobium medicae in screens for
acid-sensitive mutants and they encode homologs of MprF. An analysis of the
sequenced bacterial genomes reveals that genes coding for homologs of MprF from
S. aureus are present in several classes of organisms throughout the bacterial
kingdom. In this study, we show that the expression of lpiA from R. tropici in
the heterologous hosts Escherichia coli and Sinorhizobium meliloti causes
formation of LPG. A wild-type strain of R. tropici forms LPG (about 1% of the
total lipids) when the cells are grown in minimal medium at pH 4.5 but not when
grown in minimal medium at neutral pH or in complex tryptone yeast (TY) medium at
either pH. LPG biosynthesis does not occur when lpiA is deleted and is restored
upon complementation of lpiA-deficient mutants with a functional copy of the lpiA
gene. When grown in the low-pH medium, lpiA-deficient rhizobial mutants are over 
four times more susceptible to the cationic peptide polymyxin B than the wild
type.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI-20-11-1421 
PMID: 17977153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Sep;53(6):1757-70.

Identification of a gene required for the formation of lyso-ornithine lipid, an
intermediate in the biosynthesis of ornithine-containing lipids.

Gao JL(1), Weissenmayer B, Taylor AM, Thomas-Oates J, López-Lara IM, Geiger O.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación sobre Fijación de Nitrógeno, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, Apdo. Postal 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos, CP62210, Mexico.

Under phosphate-limiting conditions, some bacteria replace their membrane
phospholipids by lipids not containing any phosphorus. One of these
phosphorus-free lipids is an ornithine-containing lipid (OL) that is widespread
among eubacteria. In earlier work, we had identified a gene (olsA) required for
OL biosynthesis that probably encodes an O-acyltransferase using acyl-acyl
carrier protein (acyl-AcpP) as an acyl donor and that converts lyso-ornithine
lipid into OL. We now report on a second gene (olsB) required for OL biosynthesis
that is needed for the incorporation of radiolabelled ornithine into OL.
Overexpression of OlsB in an olsA-deficient mutant of Sinorhizobium (Rhizobium)
meliloti leads to the transient accumulation of lyso-ornithine lipid, the
biosynthetic intermediate of OL biosynthesis. Overexpression of OlsB in
Escherichia coli is sufficient to cause the in vivo formation of lyso-ornithine
lipid in this organism and is the cause for a 3-hydroxyacyl-AcpP-dependent
acyltransferase activity forming lyso-ornithine lipid from ornithine. These
results demonstrate that OlsB is required for the first step of OL biosynthesis, 
in which ornithine is N-acylated with a 3-hydroxy-fatty acyl residue in order to 
obtain lyso-ornithine lipid. OL formation in a wild-type S. meliloti is increased
upon growth under phosphate-limiting conditions. Expression of OlsB from a broad 
host range vector leads to the constitutive formation of relatively high amounts 
of OL (12-14% of total membrane lipids) independently of whether strains are
grown in the presence of low or high concentrations of phosphate, suggesting that
in S. meliloti the formation of OlsB is usually limiting for the amount of OL
formed in this organism. Open reading frames homologous to OlsA and OlsB were
identified in many eubacteria and although in S. meliloti the olsB and olsA gene 
are 14 kb apart, in numerous other bacteria they form an operon.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04240.x 
PMID: 15341653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Artículo con ID: 27760387 citado en los artículos con IDs: ['34332123', '34093456', '33842554', '33785829', '33717018', '33430006', '33356849', '32955879', '32375407', '32320464', '32153529', '32117988', '31949186', '31110206', '30621587', '30108306', '29802183', '29046620', '28684991']
Artículo con ID: 25925947 citado en los artículos con IDs: ['33445571', '30367006', '30154768', '29374042', '28360896', '26150465']
Artículo con ID: 25040623 citado en los artículos con IDs: ['33750904', '33692768', '33469548', '33445571', '30367006', '30154768', '30108306', '29038461', '28522365', '28030630', '27331395', '26733994', '26175720', '26150465', '25925947', '25699032']
Artículo con ID: 20153447 citado en los artículos con IDs: ['34361895', '31296165', '31213552', '27503996', '26644381', '25583710', '24688705', '24479701', '23652766', '23583844', '23283001', '23270491', '23002222', '22570611', '20795687']
Artículo con ID: 20018679 citado en los artículos con IDs: ['33793933', '33692768', '33361371', '32668657', '32307636', '31420340', '31248059', '30789965', '30777812', '30154768', '29802183', '28526844', '28416708', '27911408', '27447951', '27307578', '27233093', '26565724', '26235234', '26056292', '25711932', '25657645', '24723930', '24558041', '23500459', '23457299', '23356794', '23354714', '22958119', '22773629', '22633059', '21926226', '21602377', '21239587', '21160536']
Artículo con ID: 17977153 citado en los artículos con IDs: ['34063718', '34006869', '33495702', '32479092', '31295802', '29970182', '29760688', '29375522', '27818647', '27503996', '27485828', '27160595', '26733994', '26235234', '25927010', '25576607', '24982308', '24748493', '24723930', '23793054', '23792962', '23270491', '22958119', '22583835', '22491694', '22267511', '22262511', '22133164', '21392131', '21205018', '20161304', '19915718', '19787708', '19734140', '19216801', '19074395', '18708506', '18305156']
Artículo con ID: 15341653 citado en los artículos con IDs: ['34500726', '33750904', '33692768', '33469548', '33445571', '30367006', '30108306', '29038461', '28522365', '27447951', '27233093', '26733994', '26175720', '26150465', '26056292', '25925947', '25404698', '24723930', '23995937', '23844246', '22958119', '22783226', '22262511', '21840974', '21609491', '21249206', '21205018', '19787708', '19096048', '18656959', '17347518', '16428413']
